Jay Weidner is a scholar, film maker and writer,
who has spent decades researching gnostic texts,
Egyptian mysticism and alchemy.
His most recent film is the documentary,
Time Wave 2013.
In this conversation, Jay speaks very frankly
about the times in which we're living
and the need for people to be prepared for rapid change.
More so, Jay is saying that we need to take a proactive
position in choosing the quality of our future
rather than waiting to see what's going to be dished to us,
because he says it would not be to our liking.
(calming music)
Jay, you're talking about
the greatest crisis in human history,
and you're saying it didn't just start
in the last couple of years,
even though that's when the discomfort
may be ratcheting up for those who are awake.
But you say 14, 15 years ago.
Can you talk about that?
Yeah, well the Mayan calendar moves
in 20 year cycles.
They're called kathoons,
and the last 20 year cycle of the Mayan calendar
began in 1992, 1993 and ends in 2012.
As we all know the famous 2012 date.
And you can see
a kind of sudden deterioration in the body politic
around that time.
Greed was unleashed and people were becoming
incredibly self centered and but also other things happened.
For instance the internet really got going in 1993.
Globalization, NAFTA and GAT were passed
around that time period.
So we can see there's a beginning of a strange
coherence that started there,
which also,
kind of parallels the incoherence
that began at the same time.
And as you travel through that time period
it's like watching a slow automobile accident.
You know, in slow motion
and you're watching the wheels come off
and you're watching the door crunch
and the glass is busting.
And you know something bad is gonna happen,
and you know,
Have the air bags already?
Air bags are going. (laughter)
And you know, oh my god, you know?
And so for us who are maybe aware of all this
it's somewhat painful to watch it,
because we tried to warn people then.
I had a show on National Public Radio
and I was, at the time.
And I was trying to tell people
that it was time to start action.
And no one would do it because human beings
are inherently lazy.
I'm sorry to say,
and they won't do anything until it's time to do it.
So we been sitting around,
twittling our thumbs,
thinking about all the things that we
want to do in our lives and everything.
And now the exteriorized world is about to come in,
invade our private lives
and disrupt everything we know.
That's what's going on.
And my contention is no longer that this is happening.
If you don't believe that this is happening,
I don't care.
Honestly, I'm sorry.
But if you are sensitive enough to know
there's something odd happening then you're the ones
that I'm trying to talk to.
And you know there's something going on
and you're not sure what to do about it.
And that is the premiere question
that we must ask ourselves today.
What is it that we want?
Where are we going
and what do we want to have when we get there.
And if we want to go on with this materialist
world that we're living in,
we're gonna fail.
It's a virtual world.
It's not built on anything that's real.
It's not built on growing food and loving each other.
It's built on virtual money that you made that you lost.
That you made and then you lost.
And you never really had it to begin with.
And then you're angry because you think
you lost what you never had.
When it was never there and it has no value.
And so we're living in a world where nothing
has any value any more.
And it's getting worse.
Right now the commodity exchanges are collapsing
becuase no one's buying anything.
General Motors isn't buying metal from Africa.
Toyota isn't buying plastics from Mexico.
We're seeing this incredible commodity breakdown happening.
Shipping has virtually coming to a standstill in the world.
Grains aren't being shipped from the United States to China,
or from Argentina to India.
And if you're a wise person and you can extrapilate
on what is happening in the present
to figure out what is going on in the future,
then you will see that we're heading towards
a complete breakdown of everything.
And I want to say one thing.
Being psychic is our survival tactic,
and the tribes in the hunter gatherer days
that were psychic, the shamans who were psychic,
they knew were the fist would be a week from now.
They knew where the herds would be.
So they survived.
The ones who didn't have the psychic abilities died.
And so the human race has an intrinsic
evolutionarily derived psychic nature
that has been a survival tactic that we have used.
And we, especially in the last, in the West,
in the last five or six hundred years,
we honestly, we killed our psychics,
Yeah.
in the Inquisition and so we are bereft of this
incredible knowlede and so we have to go to other cultures
to find out what they're saying.
So we're going to Mumbai.
That's where the 2012 conference.
That's right.
That's where we went to the Mayans.
We went to the Cairo.
We went to the Tibetans and we brought back that knowledge.
And a few of us still retained,
somehow we survived the Inquisition
with our psychic abilitites in tact.
And we know what's going on,
but we can't convince those who are not
as aware of us, that this is happening.
So we've kind of thrown our hands up and said,
okay then this must be preordained.
It is just going to happen.
You were talking about in the 1990's.
Well, here we're seeing just unmitigated greed
on every level.
Now we're seeing wheels come off the economy.
We're even looking at an embarrassed,
if you can say that,
Allen Greenspan, (laughs)
be roasted before the Congress.
I wish.
Saying, well there's one thing
I thought I could rely on.
I thought I could rely on the fact that companies
would at least keep this going
through their own desire for self preservation.
What happened where that didn't even work?
That is great.
That's a great question.
Yeah, we'd been told by Milton Freidman
and all these economists that the market
will solve all problems
and that the market is self correcting
and you know we bought it.
We believed it, you know.
So we kind of dropped this Kensian economics
in the last 20 years.
Around 1992 by the way.
And we developed and adopted this,
developed from an Austrian economist, Milton Freidman.
And it's this laisez faire attitude
that everything will correct itself.
And it is odd, to be honest with you,
that a company would fudge it's books,
because it has to answer up and make a profit.
So why would it do that.
So why would a compnay do that?
Why would they cook their books
knowing what's coming down the pipe?
Because we intrinsically
know that this is coming apart.
And the CEO's and the leaders of corporate America
and the world are grabbing everything they can
before it's gone.
It's a white out sale.
The last lamb grab.
Everything must go.
It's a gigantic sale.
Like at Macy's.
Unfortunately, we have to find a way to stop them
from taking every single last resource
before it's gone.
If we don't do this there's not going to be
any forest left, any fish left, any topsoil left.
And we're going to all starve to death.
Okay, because they've got this idea
that they can grab all they want and move into citadels
of power where they'll be protected from the masses
that are outside the citadels.
And there is no place safe any more.
Leonard Cohen said you know,
that in the future you're private life
will be completely known.
And this was before the internet.
And that's what's going on now.
So we know who they are now.
We know their names.
It's the first time in history, because of the internet,
we know their names.
And they know that we now know who they are.
But they have secret places to go to
that we don't.
They do.
They're building underground facilities
all over the southwest United States,
under Denver airport and they think
they're gonna hang out their until this thing is over.
And this thing that they want to have happen,
I call the culling and it's to pull the rug out
from underneath us all, with oil.
And when the oil based economy goes
because we don't know how to grow food without oil,
because we can't transport goods without oil,
everything will fall into chaos
and we're gonna kill each other.
This is what they think will happen.
And this is what they sort of are planning on.
Okay?
And we have to say, yeah that's not gonna be
the way its,
you think that's what's gonna happen
because of the way that we used to be.
But that's not the way it is now.
And that's what this is all about.
We're building a future that is completely
denying them the right to the reigns of power.
I heard a very interesting
statistic recently and I looked at the math
and I thought, I'd love to have a couple of other
mathematicians go over this.
Because it was saying,
and just forgive me because my numbers
are off just a little bit, but something like
a parcel of 45 feet by 125 feet.
If you put two people in a little home,
on that amount of space,
you could fit the entire population of the world
in the state of Texas.
Dang.
Okay, now, doesn't that mean
that we're simply doing it all wrong?
Absolutely.
We should not be starving to death.
No thank you for that question
because people come to me and say,
well it's a good thing.
I was just in Germany
and they were, oh it's a good thing
that they're gonna kill everybody.
There's too many people.
Well, where do you get your idea from?
Well, you're getting it from them,
because they're the ones that are financing
the studies that says there's too many people.
That's right Paul Ehrlich who wrote the Population Bomb,
was funded by the Council on Foreign Relations.
And he said that the world would be wiped out
by 1980 and gigantic famines.
It didn't happen.
If we had ten billion people living on planet earth,
we have six billion now.
If we had 10 billion and they were all living
like Zen monks, you could fly over the earth
continuously and see no evidence
of human civilization anywhere.
You could have 1 billion Bill Gates
and the world would be destroyed.
So it is not the quantity of the people
it's the consumption habits that we're,
and we think we need this and we think we need that
because they've sold us.
Because they are in a 300 year long ponzi scheme.
And it started around 1700 and it's ending now.
And it's a ponzi scheme.
It's a pyramid scheme where the people at the very end
of it get screwed by everybody else,
and we're the ones that are on the bottom of the pyramid
and we're about to get screwed by this ponzi scheme.
But you're saying it doesn't
have to be that way.
It's not going to be that way.
Yes, let's talk about your vision
of what happens.
We're gonna pop through this viel.
We all know that we're here at 2012,
recession of the equinox.
We have interviews with a number of people on that,
but let's just say now we've popped through
to the other side.
What do you think this (mumbles) period feels like
and what's it going to look like on the other side?
Well the next few years until 2012
are gonna be unfortunately, for all of us not very good.
And we are going to have to radically reassess
what we are doing.
If you are not waking up every single morning
ready to radically reassess your life every day,
you will fail.
If you're not willing to rewrite everything,
because everything is being rewritten
and only those who are willing and courageous
enough to do that are gonna be the ones
to survive and their families of course.
And I'm actually, I'm calling on men,
because I know that women already know what's going on,
but men have lost their way.
And they are not taking control of their lives,
they're not taking responsibility for their families,
for their loved ones.
And they're abrogating the authority that they have.
Men do not really have a lot of authority.
They can't create children.
They can't do these things.
But what they can do is they can protect their loved ones,
and they're not doing it.
And so, I'm actually calling on men to
return back to a time where you take responsibility
for your life and for your family
and you protect them from what is about to happen.
And the way to protect them is not to buy a bunch of guns
and go live like a survivalist.
Survivalists have some good things though.
You need to get to a place where you can produce your
own food, fresh water.
All these things are necessary,
but there's other things that we need to do.
We need to rethink our spiritual relationship
with each other and with nature
and we need to do a radical reassessment
of how we operate in this world.
And I'm not advocating like Marxism or something.
I don't think it's a socialist revolution
or a workers revolution.
I think, Einstein said you could not solve a problem
at the same level that that problem was created.
We cannot solve political problems at a political level.
We have to rise above it.
The next level above political is the spiritual level.
When we solve the spiritual problem
the levels underneath will solve themselves
and that's where we have to come in with these.
We have to show the ones that don't believe
what we're saying that what we're saying has a geat deal
of credibility for your health, for the environment,
for your well being.
And then we have to practice it ourselves
which we're not doing a very good job of.
And then so this is discipline.
This is creating a discipline.
Tai chi or it's yoga.
Or it's martial art.
It's something that creates an internal dynamic
within the body that doesn't need
to have the medical care
that's pharmaceutically based.
That we don't really want the government
to give us health care.
I hate to say this because it sounds like such a good idea
because it won't be health care.
It'll be death care.
This is a really good point.
Let's get into that a little bit more,
because one of the things that's going to go
as the economy continues its downturn
is health benefits anyway.
They're already taking them away.
They're raising the deductible so high
it's almost unreasonalble to even have health care.
So this comes down to some hard core issues.
Are we willing to take responsiblity for our own
healths and that of our loved ones.
And are we willing to live with those consequences?
That's right.
And the thing is, is that,
and the thing is with that is that
only those people who are asking
those questions will survive.
Yes.
That's the thing that's really ironic about this.
This is actually a cultural evolution
that is born from an intelligent
inquiry into nature and reality.
And those who do that,
who are unafraid to make that inquiry are going to survive
and all the rest are it's gonna be borderline for them.
And I want them to come with us.
And you know maybe it'll only be 10%,
maybe it'll be 100%.
We don't know.
But if they keep relying on pharmaceuticals
and the torturous food that they're selling
in the stores then we are going to fail and.
What about education?
The torturous education in schools. (laughs)
If you want to call it education.
Exactly.
Yeah we need to find new ways to educate.
We're not doing it.
We can't do it in this.
With the modern world,
the mistake the modern world has made,
is it has mistook
quantity for quality.
We think that if you're the biggest and the best.
You know, you have the most quantity.
That that somehow is a thing to be proud of.
And it isn't the quantity.
You can go to a really bad restaurant and have tons and tons
of really bad food.
You got a lot of food, okay.
But none of it's worth a damn, okay.
Are we talking education still I take it?
Mm-hmm. Yeah, and so we're not teaching
our children that it's quality of life.
Not quantity of life.
It's not how many years you lived,
it's what did you do in the years that you had.
It's not how much money you have,
it's what are you doing every day with your life.
These are the things that we have
completely misconstrued in the modern world.
And these are the things that are, thank god,
shattering, blowing apart, coming to an end.
And it's a reason for celebrating.
It's a great thing that this old world is dying
and a new world is emerging
and we have to define that new world now.
Doesn't it seem like it's going to
really take communal efforts,
and again we're not talking communism
or socialism.
No.
We talking about caring about each other.
That's right.
The problem with communism and socialism
is again it's dictated from above.
And it's the messiah complex.
We keep waiting for this messiah to come and save us.
And now we have America, we have another messiah
about to come and save us.
And it's just, it's not gonna happen.
And we have to like come to grips with this idea
that you're not going to have some force
come from without and rearrange your life.
If that happens, it's gonna be rearranged for the worst
because they don't have your interest at heart.
They don't even know what your interests are, okay.
So we have to reject their world.
I hate to say this but that's where we are right now.
We need to reject their world.
We need to create our own scene.
Our own world, our own culture.
Free from them.
And when we do they will come to us.
I'm old enough to remember Haight Ashbury.
Okay, so the sixties, the hippies rejected modern culture.
And they didn't do a very good job of it.
And they took too many drugs.
And they had too much, well I won't even go into that.
But they rejected culture, and in that rejection,
what would happen is, is that buses would drive
up and down Haight Ashbury full of mid westerners
looking at the hippies.
The hippies weren't going to the midwest
looking at the midwesterners.
They were coming to San Francisco
and looking at the hippies.
And that's what I mean.
When you create a culture,
an alternative culture, they're gonna come to us.
Now this time let's not do it the way we did it then.
That was a mistake.
It was fun.
We have to do it in a mature way this time.
Yes.
We have families (mumbles).
That's right.
We don't want our kids to do what we did.
No, and we know the mistakes that we made
and we know the casualties that occurred
and we can't have that.
So we're now moving into our sixties and we have
to become the elders that we never had.
And Jay we've got this election coming up
in a couple of days by the time anyone sees this
it will have been passed,
but there's this very unsettled feeling
about all of it right now.
What is just your, just more from,
just speculation, intuition,
whatever you want to call it.
What do you think's coming up this next couple of years
on the political scene?
I think Barak Obama's an interesting guy
because he is not, they say oh he's tapped into the cultural
meme that's happening,
but I don't think that's what's happening.
I think the cultural meme is tapping into Barak.
And that's why it rejected Hillary who had
the Clinton machine behind her.
Frankly, I don't understand how anyone
could beat the Clinton machine,
because I know the Clinton machine and it is serious.
So just that point alone, the guy deserves kuddos.
Just by defeating that.
But he, I've noticed and watched,
he is almost like an adaptoid
to what is happening as.
He's not really a leader.
He is a person who's a mirror
of the collective unconscious.
Now is he going to succeed?
I hope he does.
But he probably won't.
Why?
Because the powers that be are so entrenched,
and they're not going to let it happen.
God forbid if something horrible happens.
So I think that he, if he's elected
or if he isn't elected.
Actually if he isn't elected it may actually
cause a revolution to happen.
If he is elected it may hold it off for a couple of years,
but I still think that something is going
to happen in a couple of years.
And it's our choice, is this going to be
a violent revolution where we have Robes Piere killing
people in the streets of Paris,
or is it going to be a revolution
more akin to the Velvet Revolution of Czechoslovakia
and Poland where no one died?
And I think that's what we have to be going after,
a Ghandi like rebellion that says no,
we're not going to fight you.
We're not cooperating with you.
There's this great scene in the movie Ghandi.
I forget the name of the actor, great British actor.
He walks up to Ghandi played by Ben Kingsley
and he says, (British accent)
"Well, you don't expect the British to just walk
"out of India do you?",
and Ghandi goes,
"Oh, oh no I don't expect you to walk out.
"There's trains and there's boats, you know,
"you can go there." (laughter)
And that's how we have to do it.
We have to say, we're just staying here.
We're not going anywhere and you guys
are gonna have to deal with it.
And that takes courage and that's what we're lacking today.
That's why I get back to this thing about men.
I'm a firm believer of male initiation
and we don't initiate males in our world.
And what initiation does especially for males,
is it teaches us how to not be afraid.
And so if we don't initiate males,
they will initiate themselves.
Whether it's snow boarding down a 14,000
foot mountainside, joining the military
and killing people in Iraq,
drinking themselves into oblivion.
This is a male problem that we're dealing with today.
It's a repercussion of the patriarchy that's been here
for five or six thousand years.
But we lost the ability to initiate males
through this process.
And so there's unleashed male energy on the earth
right now and it's the single most dangerous force there is,
and if it is not abated soon,
it will turn into war lords and gigantic gangs of armed men,
and this is something that is on the horizon
that we really have to be careful of.
And so that is one of the reasons why I'm saying
a lot of the things that I'm saying,
because I've talked to the experts who have done
their projections and they're very afraid.
And believe me the members of Congress
and the members of Senate
and the Executive branch they know of these reports.
They know.
That's why they're doing what they're doing.
They're very afraid of what's about to happen.
And we need to take male energy and direct
it into a courageous masculine environment.
Not one that goes and seeks to destroy,
but one that says, no, no, no.
I'm in control of my life and I don't need you, okay.
And when that happens, it'll all end and women
need to come forth and show us how to be courageous.
It's the Joan of Arch model.
You know, France is being subjected by the English
and they were being destroyed.
The English actually had a plan to destroy France.
And Joah of Arch, this 14 year old girl, you know,
rose up and beat the biggest power on earth
and drove them back accross the English Channel.
Excuse me.
And changed France and saved France.
And she's now a saint,
but she was burned at the stake by the same church
that later made her a saint.
And this is the model that women need to,
they need to rise up and say to men,
I am brave.
Am I braver than you?
And believe me there's nothing a man
wants more than to prove that he is courageous and brave.
I know a lot of brave women.
There's a lot of opportunity to match it out there.
I agree.
People like you are standing up to the plate.
Any final thoughts?
What's going on in 2012 is we're reaching a collective
conclusion about what kind of world we want post 2012.
And for the first time in human history,
we're all thinking about that world in mass.
And whatever it is that we are going to create,
we're going to start here and now to create this world.
And so it's our choice.
Do you want a world of violence and fascism
and environmental degridation?
Or do you want a world where people cooperate
with each other,
where the food is high quality,
where we sit around listening to music
and singing around the fire
and loving each other.
That's the choice.
I choose that one.
Me too.
Thank you jay.
(calm music)
You can pick up a copy of Jay's documentary,
2012 The Oddysey
or Timewave 2013 by going to his site
at JayWeidner.com.
Meanwhile, we have other perspectives on 2012,
not the least of which is our interview
with John Major Jenkins which you may also enjoy.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(calming music)